There's mention of Greenland being
invaded by the United States. There's
the situation in Iran. Trump has
snatched Maduro from Venezuela. There's
[music] talk of China taking back
Taiwan. What the hell is going on?
>> Well, what you're seeing is the West
becoming [music] weaker and embolding
our enemies and the final collapse of a
shared myth that we were living in a
structured world where everything is
done according to the rules. That is now
gone. And Trump is acting in recognition
of that reality, saying we are not going
to play by [music] the fake rules
anymore that no one else is playing by.
Anyway,
>> is there a risk with this strategy?
>> Of course. And we can talk about the
reasons for it. I think it's really
important.
>> The floor is yours.
>> Constantine Kissen is one of the
sharpest voices [music] in political
commentary right now.
>> He's here to unpack the current
geopolitical landscape and what could be
done to salvage the West before it's too
late.
>> So, Russia invading Ukraine was not an
accident. It was a consequence of the
fact that Putin felt this was the moment
to test the waters. Can we now do the
things we've always wanted to do?
Because the West lost its focus and
sense of purpose. [music] So, for
example, I don't know if you know this,
Europe is 12% of the world's population,
25% of the world's GDP, and 60% of the
world's welfare spending. Germany
destroyed its nuclear facilities,
[music] thereby making itself reliant on
Russian gas. And in Britain, we've
destroyed our manufacturing, which is
now produced elsewhere. and we've run
down our armed forces because we have
felt so safe and so comfortable because
there's been no consequence. Well, the
consequences are here per person. We
[music] have less money today than we
did 20 years ago. We have the highest
tax burden in peace time history. We're
driving out the entrepreneurs and we've
already seen [music] a decline in our
power in the world and our influence in
the world. That's the big danger. But
there is an opportunity to turn things
around if we can make these big
decisions. What are you hopeful?
>> Listen, my my team gave me a script that
they asked me to read, but I'm just
going to ask you um in the nicest way I
possibly can. Thank you first and
foremost for choosing to subscribe to
this channel. It is um it's been one of
the most incredible crazy years of my
life. I never could have imagined. I had
so many dreams in my life, but this was
not one of them. And the very fact that
these conversations have resonated with
you and you've given me so much feedback
is something I will always be
appreciative of. And I almost carry away
a sort of burden of uh responsibility to
pay you back. And the favor I would like
to ask from you today is to subscribe to
the channel if you um would be so
obliged. It's completely free to do
that. Roughly about 47% of you that
listen to this channel frequently
currently don't subscribe to this
channel. So if you're one of those
people, please come and join us. Hit the
subscribe button. It's the single free
thing you can do to make this channel
better. And every subscriber sort of
pays into this show and allows us to do
things bigger and better and to push
ourselves even more. And I will not let
you down if you hit the subscribe
button. I promise you. And if I do,
please do unsubscribe, but I promise I
won't. Thank you, [music]
Constantine.
There is so much going on in the world
right now that it is incredibly
confusing to somebody like me who
doesn't spend a lot of time thinking
about geopolitics or the bigger picture.
I'm very very heads downstand as I
imagine a lot of people in my audience
are. We kind of get on with our lives.
But every time we look up at the news,
there's Trump has snatched Maduro from
Venezuela. There's the war with Russia
and Ukraine. There's something going on
with Iran. There's mention of Greenland
being invaded by the United States.
There's talk of China taking back
Taiwan. I wanted to speak to you today
to understand your perspective on the
bigger picture here.
>> What the hell is going on?
Well, what you're seeing is the the
final collapse of what people have
described as the postworld war II order,
which then became the post Soviet
collapse order. So, if you think about
1945, World War II finishes and the Cold
War begins. So, you go from World War II
to two big major players in the world
competing for dominance. And that lasts
until 1991 when the Soviet Union
collapses at which point you get the
uniolar world in which there's only one
hedgeimonyy, only one country that's
really setting the terms of what's
happening in the world. The west lost
its focus and its sense of purpose in
1991 because we were like, well, we we
defeated our great rival, communism,
Soviet, Russia, etc. And then we kind of
didn't really know what to do and we
took eye off the ball. And what's
happening now is that entire framework
that we have had since World War II is
disintegrating very rapidly. This is why
you know in in light of recent events
and the the Maduro situation you hear a
lot of people talk about international
law. International law was I don't know
if you if you ever had you will know
Harrari on your show. I have yet to
wrote the book book called Sapiens in
which he talks about the fact that
almost everything that we live in the
world in in which we exist is a kind of
shared myth that we have and laws and
money and all these things. They are
agreements that we have between us to
make things real that are not real.
Money isn't real. That piece of paper
has no value in your pocket really
outside of the fact that other people
have got together and agreed that it's
money. Right. Well, international law
really was that, but even weaker than
that. Because if you think about what a
law is, a law is something that has to
be backed by not only the consent of the
people who are involved, but also
ultimately it's about the use of force,
the legitimate use of force. Now, for
international law, there's never been
anything that could enforce that law
other than the most powerful country in
the world, right? So if China invades
Taiwan, no one's going to do anything
about it because there is no overarching
authority with the military to be able
to do anything about it. And so that
shared fiction that we had which we were
living in a structured world in which
everything is done according to the
rules, the rules-based order. You might
have heard that term being used. That is
now gone. And Trump is acting in
recognition of that reality. and he's
saying, well, given that it's sort of
every man for himself now, I'm going to
do what's in the interest of the United
States. Is it in the interest of the
United States, for example, to have an
openly hostile leader of a country close
to the US, which is so destabilized that
7 million people have fled as refugees?
>> Venezuela.
>> Venezuela. Is it in our interest to have
this person cozying up to Russia and
China? Is it in our interest to allow
him to have Hezbollah training camps on
the island of Margarita? Is it in our
interest? It's going back to the Monroy
doctrine, the idea that America does not
allow foreign nations to meddle in its
backyard, so to speak. And so what he's
doing now is going, "Well, look, this is
the world we live in. I'm going to do
what's best for my country." And I think
that's what you're seeing.
>> Is there a risk with this strategy?
>> Of course, there's a risk with every
strategy. Of course, there's a risk with
this strategy. There was a big risk
inevitably with this strategy and I
think you know as I talked about in my
book the the west becoming weaker and
emboldening our enemies which is what we
have done for a long time now is
creating an environment where we are
opening ourselves up to challenge from
other forces. Russia invading Ukraine
was not an accident. It was not an
accident. It was a consequence of the
fact that Putin and other people in his
leadership team felt this was the moment
to test the waters. Can we now do the
things we've always wanted to do
>> and they felt they could do that under
Biden in your view?
>> Yes. But see, I wouldn't personalize it
down to that level. I think far too many
people get carried away with, you know,
Republican, Democrat, left, right,
Biden, Trump. It's an ongoing process
that's been going on for decades. And
the culmination of it was first the
invasion of Ukraine, then October 7th.
October 7th was not an accident either.
Hamas backed by Iran felt that this was
their moment to act because again is the
West going to be able to respond
morally, militarily, and in other ways
powerfully to that. They felt that they
were able to test it. The fact that
China now is openly talking about taking
Taiwan is again another symptom of this
same thing. So the risk is there and of
course the risk as well is that you know
the the crumbling western alliance we
can talk about the reasons for it. I
think it's really important to
particularly we're recording this in
Britain and and in Europe more broadly.
I think that's an important
conversation. The western alliance is
falling apart. Um and that is always
going to be a risk. It's particularly
big risk for Europe. I feel
>> how much of this and before we go into
the details and just catch up on a few
of the things you said there. How much
of this is linked to nuclear weapons?
Because I was thinking I I can't really
All of these superpowers are going for
countries that aren't armed with nuclear
weapons.
>> And it all it somewhat feels to me that
the reason why the US wouldn't get
involved if China took Taiwan is because
they have nukes. And the reason why
the US is a little bit intimidated by
Russia is because they have nukes. So is
it really the world is splitting into
nuclear powers and anyone with nukes can
do what the they want because they
can basically wipe out planet Earth if
they get angry. And that has always been
the case except we've been constrained
by the framework of the rules-based
order. But that got taken apart. And
this is where I think the West and the
United States including needs to take
responsibility because the the war in
Afghanistan and Iraq even more so
completely undermined our moral
credibility. You know, how can you say,
well, Russia isn't allowed to invade
Ukraine if you go around invading
countries on a whim, making up excuses
and reasons to do that. So we have
eroded our moral authority and we've
also eroded our military strength and
the potential that we have to inflict
damage on people who misbehave so to
speak. So both of those things have come
together.
>> It seems so crazy to me that in my
lifetime I'm I'm seeing cuz it's really
never happened in the 33 years that I've
been alive. I'm hearing a US president
talk about kidnapping another president
and then going in and taking the oil.
And then you know what? We might take
Greenland as well. We might have that
big country over there as well. Even
though it belongs to a NATO ally in
Denmark,
>> it it feels like something has
fundamentally changed.
>> It has.
>> And I'm scared of the presidents this is
going to set because do we then all just
get to start taking countries we want?
>> Well, this is what happens when there is
a a a a shifting of the balance of
power. This is why I always said
maintaining the unipolar moment as it
was and not allowing the west to weaken
itself was a really important thing
because the moment you have a power
vacuum, you always have a power
struggle. Mexico is a very good example
of this. If you look at what's been
happening, there's been a a gigantic
drug war in Mexico for the last 20 years
because there are different cartels
vying for power. And the moment you take
out the leader of one cartel or
something happens, there's a bloodbath.
Because this is what happens when the
central authority, the central power,
the the current system breaks down. You
inevitably end up in a much more
violent, much more unstable, much more
unpredictable place. And all Trump
really is doing is reflecting the
reality that has been already there for
years, except he's reflecting in
American foreign policy. He's saying,
"Well, look, if Russia is going to do
what it wants to do, and we can't stop
them, and if China is going to do what
they want to do, and we can't stop them,
well, we've got to do what we've got to
do, and no one's going to stop us." And
that's the world you've ended up in. And
by the way, just on the nuclear point, I
think it's important to say you're 100%
right. And this is one of the things
I've always said about not supporting
Ukraine properly, which we haven't done.
we have not supported them enough to be
able to actually fully repel the
aggression from Russia is it would
inevitably lead to lots of other small
countries pursuing nuclear weapons
because it is the only guarantee of
security in this world. it that is a
huge danger for the world in terms of
nuclear proliferation because if the
precedent is like you say the people
with nuclear weapons can do what they
want and they can never be attacked and
the people with no nuclear weapons are
vulnerable and weak what would be the
most rational thing for you to do if
you're a smaller country that's the big
danger
>> cuz you know you were talking about a
uniolar world and a multi-polar world
but I wonder if the it's going to be how
many nuclear powers are there there's
like nine or or 10
>> if the world is going to split into
these 10 nuclear powers and these 10
nuclear powers can basically do what
they want.
>> Well, nuclear powers are different. I
don't I don't see Pakistan likely to be
rampaging through its neighbors, not at
least cuz they're all they're all
nuclear powers themselves. Uh I think
you're you're talking about Russia,
China, and the US primarily. I don't see
Britain, you know, reinvading France,
although that's something obviously I'm
in favor of. If Pakistan decided to take
a neighboring country though,
>> nobody can really come for them because
>> uh economic
>> having one nuke is not the same as
having a gigantic nuclear arsenal. I
think Pakistan is relatively constrained
in its behavior, but the big superpowers
are not. So,
>> by the way, retaking France was a joke.
I just want to make that clear.
>> And there's eight there's nine nuclear
powers. United States, Russia, UK,
France, China, India, Pakistan, North
Korea, and Israel. Although I don't
think they admit it.
>> Yeah. Israel's policy on nuclear weapons
is very funny. Do you know what the
official position is? We don't have
nuclear weapons, but if the state of
Israel is at risk of being destroyed, we
will definitely use them. [laughter]
>> So, how did we get here? What are what
are the factors at play that brought us
to this particular situation? You talked
about the crumbling of the Western
Alliance and other things. What what do
we need to know about what happened for
us to get to this state where it seems
like it's every big power for themsel?
>> Well, partly we've already talked about
it. So it's it's after 91 in particular
the west loses its not only its sense of
purpose but it loses its its sense of
danger and sense of risk. So we get very
comfortable. I don't know if you know
this uh Europe is 12% of the world's
population, 25% of the world's GDP and
60% of the world's welfare spending.
>> Wow.
>> So if you do that, that is a sign that
you've got very comfortable. You've got
very lazy. You have lost the ability to
realize you live in a dangerous world.
It's, you know, this is a bit of a
sidetrack, but it is an important
addendum to this conversation. This is
why European countries have pursued
economic suicide that we call net zero
as vigorously as we have because we have
felt so safe and so comfortable. we've
engaged in all this luxury uh obsessions
to the point where as you know Germany
destroyed its nuclear facilities uh
thereby making itself reliant on Russian
gas so that when Russia invaded Ukraine
the Germans opened the first thing that
they said is oh we were going to support
Ukraine we're going to give them 5,000
helmets right because they were so
dependent on Russian gas because they
refused to produce their own energy this
is exactly the same thing we've done in
Britain Britain has the highest
industrial electricity prices in the
world in the developed world which means
we basically destroyed all our
manufacturing industry which is now
produced elsewhere. We're getting to the
point where we can't make our own virgin
steel. Steel is kind of important if you
want to have a military etc etc etc. So
in Europe in particular, this has
happened because we've just felt so safe
and so comfortable and also so
rudderless that we've been able to
engage in all these looney ideas because
there's been no consequence. Well, the
consequences are here.
>> Where does Britain and Europe sit in the
sort of rankings of importance in the
world and power?
>> It's plummeting.
I mean, look at the the Trump's uh
12-day war in Iran, destroying Iran's
nuclear facilities. No one even asked
the British what we thought about
anymore. And that's not because, you
know, a lot of people like to say, "Oh,
you know, the Americans, they hate the
British." Americans love Britain. As you
know, you live in America now. You have
a British accent. I'm sure people come
up to you all the time and talk to you
about their connections with our
country, the shared history, all of that
stuff. The problem is we have made
ourselves irrelevant because everything
that Trump is looking at is strength.
Right? Is Britain strong now in the
world? No. Is Europe strong now in the
world? No. And so if you're not strong,
you will not be taken seriously. And
unfortunately because of what our
leaders have done over success of and
it's left right every political party
that we have that's been in power they
have overseen a decline in our status in
the world in our power in the world in
our influence in the world to the point
now where the Americans are looking at
Europe and they're going why would we be
allied with people who are not useful to
us an alliance is kind of like a
marriage both people have to bring
something to the table what do we bring
to the table from an American
perspective
>> this is a fairly new thing, isn't it?
Because I remember growing up, I'd
repeatedly hear the prime minister of
the UK talking about how he had spoken
to his US counterpart and they had made
a decision and then in even with the
Venezuela situation, I think Karma came
out the next day and said like, I had no
idea this was happening.
>> Of course, but why would you consult
with people who don't matter?
>> Why don't we matter?
>> We don't matter because we have nothing
to bring to the table. We don't despite
the the extremely high level of
professionalism, our technological
superiority, the courage of our soldiers
and our sailors and our airmen, despite
the immense military tradition Britain
has, we have cut I mean our debt
interest repayments annually
1.5 times heading towards being twice
our defense budget. We spent more on
paying off the debt, the national debt
every year than we spend on defense. How
did the UK get here?
>> Well, our our debt to GDP is over 100%.
We keep borrowing money. We talked about
the disproportionate amount of welfare
spending and social spending and so on.
We got here by forgetting that we live
in the real world and engaging in lots
of luxury beliefs about what we ought to
do. Uh so we have the highest tax burden
in peace time history in this country.
And we do that not because we want to
have a robust military or to do other
things like that. We do it so that we
can continue to pay ourselves money we
don't have borrowing it from our
children and our grandchildren. And this
is the case across Europe really.
America also has a high level of debt
but they have a growing economy unlike
ours. Britain uh Britain's GDP per
capita is lower today than it was in
2006. We have per capita which is what
matters per person. We have less money
today than we did 20 years ago. So our
economy's declined. We've destroyed our
manufacturing. we've run down our armed
forces. And also, I mean, look,
President Trump, I think, is fair to
say, is quite sensitive about what
people say about him. We have a
government now that very imprudently and
unwisely spent the time they were in
opposition on him on a daily
basis. David Lambie, if you take, who's
our foreign secretary, if you take some
of his comments about President Trump,
they were just deeply irresponsible.
whatever you think about the rights and
wrongs of what he said. A someone who
has the potential to be this country's
foreign secretary in charge of our
relationship with the United States
cannot be so imprudent as to make those
kinds of comments. And then you're
going, well, you've just been calling
this guy every name under the sun and
now you want to you want to be relevant.
You want to be taken seriously. You want
to be engaged with as he makes huge
decisions about geopolitics. Actions
have consequences and the actions we
have been taken have produced the
consequences that we've got. Now look, I
am not all doom and gloom about that. If
we change our strategy and if we change
our behavior, we can change the pro the
the the end product of that. We can do
that. But that's going to require a
massive readjustment
>> with the current direction of travel.
Where does the UK end up?
>> We're already there. We're irrelevant.
We are irrelevant when these, like you
said, Venezuela happens. No one cares
about us. When Iran gets bombed, no one
cares about us. All the future big
decisions about geopolitics are going to
be made without Britain even being
considered because it's going to be made
by the major powers of which Britain is
no longer one.
>> You choose to live in the UK despite
your views that the UK is a bit of a
sinking ship. I guess
>> because of my views actually.
>> Because of your views.
>> Yeah. Like look, you've moved to the
United States, which I'm grateful for
cuz it's made us the biggest UK podcast
in our space. I I appreciate that. But
as you can imagine, we get offers to do
the same in all sorts of different ways,
and we could have done the same. I love
this country. I'm very grateful to, and
I feel to stay and fight for it and to
articulate my views and try and persuade
people to my point of view so that we
can have a British renaissance, so that
we can have a British recovery is my
duty for as long as I can do that. And
if at some point, you know, I feel it's
completely futile, which I do not. Um,
>> so you hopeful.
>> I'm not despondent to the point of
giving up is where I am.
>> Are you hopeful?
>> No. No. But but I'm also not at the
point where I feel it's futile. I think
there is there is an opportunity to turn
things around if if everything comes
together and we're very fortunate. Uh,
and that's what I'm hopefully trying to
contribute to. through history when
companies pursue the strategy that the
UK is currently pursuing
>> where where does it end up economically?
>> Well, Stephen, you're the business guy.
You tell me.
>> No, but I don't I'm not I don't have the
greatest view of history and so I'm
wondering if there's because you know in
the UK I I was born 33 years ago in
Bosotswana and I moved to the UK when I
was young and um I've always known the
UK to be important and consequential and
the the economy to be, you know, much
better than where I'm from in Botswana.
So it's it's almost inconceivable for a
British person of my age to to think
that the UK could ever not be that. Yes.
Because it's always been in my lifetime.
>> Yes. But that is in many ways I'm not
pinning the blame on you obviously, but
that is in many ways how we got here.
Because what we thought collectively
was, well, look, no matter what we do,
we're always going to be Great Britain.
We're going to have a great economy.
We're going to have a strong military.
We're going to have a this. We're going
to have influence in the world. And then
we started doing lots of stupid
And that's how we've ended up in the
place that we've ended up. So this
country has every potential to be great.
The people are incredible. The level of
education, uh, the scientific and
technological advances that this country
has produced, the cultural, look at the
greatest bands in human history. Like
half of them are British comedians. I
mean, standup comedy is not a a British
invention. It was actually invented in
America. But look at some of the
greatest comedians in human history.
Again, lots and lots of British people.
So culturally, scientifically,
technologically, economically, we have
the potential. We have to have the
correct leadership and the right
strategy. And those two things have been
lacking for a long time. That's how
we've ended up here. Can we turn it
around? It's going to be very, very,
very difficult. But I but we've got to
try.
>> Why would these issues impact us on a
individual level? So I'm thinking about
the average person listening now,
whether they are in the United States or
here in Britain. You know, this stuff
happens kind of up above us and we get
on with our lives. But what are the
symptoms we'll begin to see
>> this multipolar world or the the fall of
Britain?
>> You are already poorer today than you
were 20 years ago
>> per capita
>> in the UK.
>> In the UK,
>> yeah,
>> that seems to me quite important. And in
fact, many of our conversations about
domestic issues, whether it's mass
immigration and all of these other
things, they're really proxies for that
conversation. because if we if the
economy was growing and people felt
richer,
all of this stuff would become less
important, right? Well, I think we'd
agree with that. So, that's one aspect
of it. The other aspect of it is, as I
talked about the multipolar world being
by necessity more violent and unstable.
We are going, you know, you we I don't
know when this will go out, but we're
recording this in the middle of January.
It's been like two weeks since the year
started and we've already seen crazy
amounts of instability geopolitically
already. Is that fair to say? So, this
will continue and that will bleed
through to domestic politics because if
you have to spend more of your resources
worrying about things abroad, it means
you can do less at home and so on and so
on and so on. So the the ramifications
of this will be very impactful on
everybody around the world more on
non-western countries because they a lot
of them are going to be in the front
line of this in in the way that I I
doubt we will be. Uh but still the
consequences for us will be very
significant.
>> And we're seeing adjacent to this this
rise in socialism.
>> Yeah.
>> The conversation around socialism.
Obviously Menani has been elected mayor.
But do you think this is at all linked
to the bigger picture this rise in
socialism?
>> Yeah. In fact, I I think you know I
wrote an article a long time ago called
Why I Fear the Future and I did a video
based on it in which I talked about
something. It's interesting. I did a
live show um here in London just before
Christmas and I did a book signing and
one of the guys came up to me and he
said, "I've got two kids. They're both
teenagers, daughter and the son and I'm
trying to pull the daughter in from the
far left and I'm trying to pull the son
in from the far right." That's going to
be the big challenge going forward
because um the amount of chaos and
instability and cultural kind of
cultural upheaval that we've seen has
produced a craving for order and on the
social that's the right side you know we
must you know get this and on the other
side it's produced a sense of injustice
and the pursuit of inequality. That's
why you hear people talk so much about
the rich the rich the rich the rich and
you know eat the rich we got to
redistribute all of this stuff because
particularly in the big cities young
people rightly feel that they can they
can't really get on the housing ladder
they can't establish a family life is
more difficult so they reach for these
very um dis disproven discredited and
completely unworkable solutions of the
kind Manny uh will of course deliver but
it's because their sense of their sense
is that the future's been taken away
from And in many ways they're correct
because as I said earlier we have been
borrowing from our children and our
grandchildren. We've been saddling with
crippling debts our entire economy that
will come to an end and it's going to be
them that is left to foot the bill and
it's going to be very painful and partly
they see that and already they see that
they just can't afford the life that
they want. I do think in the United
States it's a much more contained
phenomenon. I think Mamani and if you
look at sort of the American socialists,
they all tend to cluster around New York
and one or two other big cities. It's
not like the entirety of America is
going socialist. But I think housing
unaffordability is one. Another
explanation which I think is also
powerful is what's called elite over
production which is if you have as Tony
Blair did this idea that 50% of the
public should should go to university.
Well, they do and then it turns out
there's not enough jobs for them.
Particularly in the age of AI where they
are the jobs that are being eliminated
very rapidly. You then get a lot of
people whose entitlement is up here and
whose prospects are down here. That
produces a tremendous amount of social
disease as well.
>> I think this is a really important
connected point
on the subject of socialism and the rise
of socialism that we will see is this
point of AI. And when I listen to very
very smart people who are considered to
be the godfathers of AI or CEOs who are
building these technology companies,
there seems to be a consensus that
socialism will only increase because the
job losses associated with AI are going
to be pretty quick and pretty extreme.
And um I mean one of them that most
Brits won't understand is something we
understand now living in America, which
is my car drives itself.
>> Yes. And I I've said this a few times
because I'm really trying to it's like
the first moment Eureka moment I think
you have is in America when I get in my
car I don't touch the steering wheel or
the pedals and it can drive me to Joshua
Tree which is like 2 and a half three
hours away uninterrupted and I say this
because driving is like one of the
biggest employees in the world. I think
it is the biggest profession in the
world
>> and London just announced that Whimos
are here and soon surely Teslas will be
allowed to do full self-driving here as
well
>> and in such a world delivery drivers,
taxi drivers, Uber drivers are going to
be without jobs and we're seeing this um
huge rise in autonomous humanoid robots
as well
>> and Elon's pay packet says that he he
will make a million of these autonomous
robots and get them out into the world
and Jason Kakanakas who just visited
Elon 's factory said there'll be a
billion of these and he thinks that we
won't even even remember Tesla for
making cars will only remember them for
the robots they're made because these
Optimus robots which are coming are
going to be so consequential and the
last point here is a very good friend of
mine who runs this big sort of
innovation accelerator in San Francisco
I visited the accelerator a couple of
weeks back and um he I said to him why
why is everybody here all these young
founders these 40 50 young founders in
your building called effing all working
on robotics and he goes well you know
we've had all parts for like 20, 30
years. But the expensive part was the
intelligence.
>> The brain.
>> Yeah. The brain. He goes, "Now we have
the bra." He said, "It used to He showed
me this arm, this robotic arm that had a
frying pan on it that would cook for you
in a box. It just cooks whatever you
want in a box." And he goes, "We've had
all these parts for the last 30 years."
That they were cheap. He goes, "The the
intelligence part, the brain would cost
20 or $30,000 just for this little robot
arm." He goes, "Now it's like 2 cents."
>> Yeah.
>> And he say, "So you're seeing this huge
explosion in robotics." I don't think
people understand what's coming.
>> No. And going to San Francisco is
eyeopening on two levels. Number one is
like a quarter to a third of the cars on
the road don't have drivers.
>> Yeah.
>> And just visually seeing that is so
striking.
>> Um but the other thing is talking to
some of the people involved. There is a
there are some people who are fairly
sensible about it, fairly responsible
among the founders, although they will
still say and I think they're right that
like if we don't do this, China will and
so we've got to do this. But there's
also a lot and I I'm sure you've
encountered there's a kind of you know
that famous Facebook mantra of move fast
and break things. There's a lot of that
going on in the AI space and so it's
going to be hugely impactful. I don't
claim to know the the all the little
details of how that will play out other
than to say it's going to be very
disruptive. Uh and disruptiveness has
happened throughout human history. It's
always produced a backlash. It's always
caused a lot of disease. But then
humanity has managed to recover. This is
different level and we will see how it
plays out. But yeah, of course it's
going to be and yeah, a world in which
millions of people in which millions of
people no longer have jobs and most of
them are disproportionately young people
who are more prone to extremism anyway.
Yeah, that's not a pretty picture
>> and one would assume that the wealth
will acrude to a few.
>> Yes,
>> in such a scenario.
>> And what's funny is I have said really
only half jokingly. I mean I wrote a
whole book about my opposition to
communism and socialism based on
experience.
In a world in which no one has a job,
I'm like 100% on board with communism.
>> Do you think that's the world we're
heading towards?
>> Possibly.
>> Yeah. But it makes sense. I mean, like
you, if you think about it from the
perspective of
50 people in the world, have all the
money in the world, and everyone else
has no job. I think a little bit of
wealth redistribution is going to be
unavoidable in that situation. And it
can either happen voluntarily or it's
going to happen at the end of bayonets.
That's the choice.
>> When you say communism would be the only
choice in such a scenario, what what
does that mean?
>> Uh it means everybody gets paid for
existing,
right? Well, I mean, what else is there?
You're going to create fake jobs for
people. That's not going to work, right?
So if if all the wealth in the world is
going to be created by robots, a world
in which th the products of their labor
it only acrus to 50 people who had the
idea or did the work 20 years ago that's
not going to sustain itself. And so uh
it would be very very unwise of those
people to attempt to hold on to all that
wealth and it would not end well for
them in my opinion.
>> On a personal level, you know, this
disruption is going to happen in your
lifetime.
>> Yeah. Are you thinking much about it or
planning for it at all? Did has it
changed any of the decisions you you
make on a a day-to-day basis or
month-to-month basis?
>> Well, I'm very fortunate that I am
probably a little harder to replace with
a robot just because people don't really
want to hear robots opinions. I would
imagine we might get to that point, but
I think it's unlikely. So on my my own
level, I'm probably, you know, the time
scale I'm working to in the next 10
years, I imagine I'll I'll get myself to
a point where I'm going to be reasonably
comfortable no matter what happens. For
my children,
>> that was us cutting forward 10 years and
watching.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Just totally me just
unemployed long. [laughter]
I can't believe what happened. For my
children, it's a very different
conversation. Uh so a lot of people are
like, well, you know, what should I
teach my children? And people are, oh
yeah, they should be a plumber. I don't
think you're going to need plumbers 15,
20 years from now either. So I I
honestly don't know what that future
looks like. And in many ways, that's
always been the reality of life for most
people. We are living through one of
those great transitions in human history
in which all you can do is equip your
children with the basic skill sets of
life as opposed to what might have been
done 20 30 years ago where like you you
get you go to school to develop a skill
to go to university to build a career.
Now, you're going to have to show a lot
of flex in this modern world. So, you're
going to have to be personable. You're
going to have to be resourceful. You're
going to have to be creative. You're
going to have to go have a a positive
go-getter mindset. You're going to have
to have those basics nailed down as
opposed to here's the career that you've
been predetermined to have, unless of
course you go into AI and robotics, in
which case you probably won't be
replaced for at least 5 years.
>> I think there's something to the fact
that there's an angst with AI. And when
you know people listen to podcasts all
the time. Yeah.
>> They everyone who has a job in a big
corporate environment now is being told
by their CEO that you better learn AI or
it's going to replace you. So we're
living in this moment of
>> there's like aliens coming over the
horizon and we've spotted them.
>> They're not quite here yet,
>> but it's it's like saying to the general
public, look, there's aliens coming and
they're coming for your job and
everything you value. That angst in and
of itself I think can drive people
towards ideas like socialism
understandably.
>> Yeah.
>> Because you you know it's it's a it's a
deep existential angst
>> and also a lot of the AI people not all
of them a lot of them are being but a
lot of them are being deeply
irresponsible and very unwise with their
messaging. What? Last time I was in New
York, I was walking through Time Square.
There was this giant billboard which
said, it was the name of the company,
which I don't remember. Stop hiring
humans. The age of the AI employees
here. I'm going, have you really thought
about this? Have you thought about
putting your company's name on this
poster? Do you understand the impact
this is going to have on a normal person
looking at that? Um, but they are. So,
the thing is with AI is the the positive
upsides of it are limitless. Literally
limitless. And so a lot of the people
who are in that space, that's what they
focus on. And they're like, we can solve
cancer. We can solve medical problems.
We can have AI that's better than any
physicist that can ever that's ever
lived that can give us the, you know,
the eternal engine or or or whatever. We
don't need energy anymore. Like there
are all sorts of crazy things that come
out of AI that are potentially
beneficial. And that is exciting. But
the angst that you talk about, I think,
is there. And I think it's also quite
rational. You just reminded me of a
video that came out this week from Elon
where he says this. I'll play it for
you. I think it's this one's. So, he's
talking about Elon's talking about the
robots that are about to be released
from Tesla, which are called Optimus.
And someone's asking him
>> how good they will be at surgery.
>> What do you think Optimus will be a
better surgeon than the best surgeons?
How long for that? [snorts]
>> Three years.
>> Three years. Okay. Yeah. And by the way,
I say three years.
at scale.
>> Yes.
>> And there will be more probably more
Optimus robots that are great surgeons
than there are
>> all surgeons on Earth.
>> And the cost of that but that's an
important statement in 3 years time.
>> Yeah.
>> Um because medicine I mean absolutely
if it's four or five years who cares.
It's still an
>> extreme precision.
>> Yes.
>> Three years. Um,
yes. Better than any any probably I'd
say if you like put a little margin on
it. Better than any human in four years
>> who's in plastic surgery. 5 years is not
even close.
>> I think your point was medicine is going
to be effectively free. The best
medicine in the world.
>> Everyone will have access to medical
care that is better than what the
president receives right now.
>> So don't go to medical school.
>> Yes. Pointless.
>> Yeah. pointless going to medical school.
>> Look, he knows way more about this than
I do. I would also say that I think both
the incentive structure and his personal
temperament lean towards a kind of
optimism and there's a sales dimension
to this as well, obviously, cuz he's one
of the people producing the stuff. So,
his optimism may be a product of the
incentive structure that he's subject
to. But even if it's not 3 years,
I I don't think it's more than 10 years.
So, that's the time frame. And given how
long it takes to train to become a
doctor. Yeah.
>> I want to talk about the situation in
Iran.
>> We're seeing what one might call an
uprising at the moment where protesters
are are on the street in a country where
it is very very dangerous um and also
very brave to protest against the
leadership there. Where does this fit in
the broader context? What what the hell
is going on?
>> I am not an expert on Iran, but
effectively what's happening in Iran is
an attempted counterrevolution. So they
had a revolution in 1979. They overthrew
the ruler, the sha, and they replaced
him with a an Islamic dictatorship,
which is what you've had since 1979. And
the people of Iran have attempted to
overthrow this Islamic dictatorship
repeatedly. They've always been brutally
suppressed. And that's basically what's
happening now again.
>> And is does this fit somewhere into the
broader conflict of geopolitics in the
US, the multipol? Well, only in the
sense that you can see that even
President Trump, who's talked quite
brashly about what he might do if this
sort of gets out of hand, is still not
as we speak doing anything about it on a
on a kind of kinetic level. And that's
partly for the reasons that we talked
about earlier, which is the United
States is deeply deeply the United
States public are deeply deeply
skeptical about foreign interventions.
And so the idea that we that we the West
would support a a regime change in Iran
is not something that you can sell to
the American people right now. And so he
has to be he has to be much more careful
about what he might otherwise have done
in Iran. And so because of that, the
leaders of Iran probably feel like
they're in a better position to crack
down and survive versus what might have
happened in the past. I mean, Trump's
been quite vocal in what he might do in
his threats. He said that the US would
come to the protesters rescue, that we
are locked, loaded, and ready to go. He
announced that countries doing business
with Iran, faced a 25% tariff on their
trade with the US, ramping up pressure.
>> And he called for Iranians to keep
protesting.
Um, and then more recently, he said,
"I've canceled all meetings with Iranian
officials until the senseless killing of
protest stops. Help is on the way. Mag
mega,
>> make Iran great." Well, Iran, you know,
I mean, one thing that should be said is
the Persian Empire and the Persian
people are a great people with a very
rich history. And what's interesting is
in attempting to over I don't know if
you've ever seen pictures from Tehran
from before 1979, it's like women
walking around in miniskirts and and all
the rest of it. So, they have a very
long history of freedom in a way that we
don't tend to think of the Middle East
as having today. uh and that's that's
that's an example of how it's perhaps
different from other parts of the Middle
East. But you can see the the reluctance
to actually do anything about it because
the question is well let's say you do
remove the current leadership. Let's say
you bring back the son of the former
Shah Resa he oversees a transition to
some kind of democratic thing. Who is
there protecting that process from being
disrupted by the remnants of the old
regime? Who's going to do that? Is there
American boots on the ground? Cuz
there's literally zero appetite for that
in America. That's the challenge that I
think he faces, which is probably why he
hasn't done anything.
>> And how do you think the story plays
out?
>> No idea, mate. No idea. I I I have no
idea what what's going to happen here. I
fear unfortunately that what the regime
will do I'm not saying this is what will
happen but my fear is and it's one of
the reasons that I am
I sympathize so deeply with the Iranian
people that are rising up against the
oppression but I am wary of encouraging
encouraging them unless we are willing
to back them fully. This is exactly in
in a way that what happened with
Ukraine. There was a lot of rah rah
rahrh and there was not nearly enough
support to actually help them defend
their country. My fear is there will be
a lot of rah. We support the Ukrainian
people. We stand with them blah blah,
you know, blah blah blah. But ultimately
the regime will kill more of them and it
will kill enough of them for this to go
away. That's my worry.
>> Well, I hope the world does come to the
support of the Iranians. I really do.
>> Me too. because for all the reasons
you've said, beautiful country,
beautiful people, and um it's it's
horrific to see what's going on. There's
varying estimates. It's unfortunately we
we don't have accurate numbers because I
mean the internet is down and it's
always hard to get accurate numbers in
the situation, but I've heard estimates
ranging from 2,000 to 18,000 people
being killed. And uh it's inconceivable
I think for Westerners like us to
understand what it is to live in an
environment like that.
>> Which is why they're protesting as
courageously as they are. I just hope
that the geopolitical realities allow us
to support them in the way that we keep
saying we would. Do you see what I'm
saying?
>> Yeah, of course. Yeah. And this is Yeah.
>> And this is my big worry. We have we
have done a lot of this. We stand with
you. We support you. And then when push
comes to shove,
the realities of the thing come into
play and suddenly we're a lot more
careful about it.
>> Trump seems to walk the walk more so
than others.
>> Absolutely.
>> And he seems to It's funny because I
think it was Biden that said to China
that if they took back Taiwan, he would
get involved.
>> Trump didn't say that.
>> He's kind of I was looking at some
quotes from Trump and it seems like he's
basically like, well, if they take
Taiwan back, I ain't going to get
involved. But in other instances where
he warns countries that he'll bomb them
or take action. Yeah.
>> Like Venezuela or like Iran with the the
nuclear weapon situation, he does seem
to follow through.
>> And I Marco Rubio and Hegathth were
saying the other day in the interview I
was watching that listen when when is
the world going to learn? If Trump says
something, he's going to do it. And you
know him saying that we will come to
your rescue.
>> Well, hopefully they come through on
that, but also hopefully they have a
plan for what happens after that.
>> Yeah. And this is the mistake we've
obviously made in a number of countries,
Libya, Iraq,
Afghanistan,
Syria, which is now basically headed by
a jihadi.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Where we go, oh yeah, we've got
to remove this terrible guy and yeah,
he's terrible guy and we're right to
remove him. But then what do you end up
with afterwards? So if they do help the
Iranian people, which I hope they have,
they have the plans to do, then I hope
they have a plan for what happens after
that and how you get Iran to a position
where the people of Iran get to choose
their own leaders and those leaders stay
in power and those leaders are the sorts
of people that you might want to see in
charge because you know this happened in
Egypt. They they they have the Arab
Spring. They overthrow the evil dictator
and what do they do? they elect the
Muslim Brotherhood and then the people
go no no no no we need the military back
etc. So these are not easy problems to
solve which is why people are being
careful about it. So I hope they have a
a plan and a solution for what comes
after if they in fact act
>> and Trump's also talking about taking
Greenland
>> which is the first time I heard him say
that I thought he was joking. I thought
this is just a funny Trump, you know,
when he was talking about taking Canada.
>> Yeah,
>> it was he was calling it the great state
of Canada. I thought this was him just
joking. But in more recent times, in the
last week, I heard him say in an
interview, "We're going to do it the
easy way or the hard way." Words to that
effect.
>> What's going on?
>> Well, we talked about they're trying to
protect their sphere of influence in
North America and South America, and
they they want they want they want to
have the military bases there that they
want to have there. They want to have
the resources and access to that.
>> Are we returning to empires?
>> We never left empire. This is the This
is the great thing that we we've been
living in the dream world. We've been
pretending these things haven't been
going on the entire time. They have. The
world's always been like this.
There was a brief moment after World War
II when it wasn't like this because we
were fighting the Soviet Union. And the
Soviet Union, the battle in the Cold War
was very similar. There was proxy wars
all over the place between those two
great powers. Right now there's two
different great powers and a third
smaller power in Russia and India is
rising as well who are all trying to
make their moves and all Trump is doing
is saying well we are not going to play
by the fake rules anymore that no one
else is playing by anyway.
>> And so is Trump endeavoring to take that
part of the world take control of that?
>> Take control. Yeah. In many ways, it's
what every great power seeks to do is to
control its neighbors so that they don't
have foreign influence in their backyard
so that they have the strategic
advantage in that area. Um, it's the way
of the world.
>> I mean, I didn't hear this rhetoric for
the other 30 years of my life.
>> Yeah.
>> As explicitly.
>> And when you say multipolar,
what are the polls?
>> Well, it's the US and China.
>> Yeah. are the two Russia wants to claim
it's a third one and then you will see
the rise of India I think over time as
well India is a lot more sensible about
these things about the way that they're
developing
>> and is is the multipolar world a good
thing or a bad thing or is it just
indifferent
>> for whom
>> for let's do people living in Europe
>> I think it's likely to be a very bad
thing for people living in Europe
because we become less powerful less
wealthy less relevant
uh for the reasons we've already
discussed. We could change it if we
wanted to.
>> How
>> we could uh abandon our suicidal
economic policy. So we could have
economic growth again which would
increase our share of GDP. We would make
our people more prosperous. It would
help to quell domestic unease.
>> Part of which has been created by mass
immigration. People care about that more
because they're poorer. Right? If we
were growing, then everybody's a little
bit happier. It's like you move to LA,
the sunshine is nice, everybody's a
little bit happier. When you're getting
richer, everybody's a little bit
happier. So, that's one of them. The
second one is you've got to recognize
that the huge waves of immigration we
have had uh have brought some positives.
They've also brought a tremendous amount
of cultural instability. People feel
like their country is changing. They
never voted for it. In fact, they
repeatedly voted against it. So you have
to arrest the sense that our country is
ceasing to be one place and instead
we're becoming different communities,
right? The this community, the that
community. Instead, we've got to go to a
place where we're all British or we're
all American or we're all French or
whatever it is, we've got to integrate
fully the people have already arrived.
And to do that, you have to make sure
you don't continue to have the same
scale of inflows that we've had. You
have to deal with illegal immigration.
You have to stop that from happening
because that that really affects how
people feel about sense of fairness and
a commitment and loyalty to their
country. One of the reasons if you talk
to young people they they'll say they're
disillusioned, they won't fight for
their country, etc. is they feel like
well their country doesn't care about
them. It's bringing in people that it's
paying to have a house and and so all
the rest of it while they can't get on
the property letter. So you've got to
deal with immigration as a whole
package. Then you have to rebuild your
military. You have to rebuild your
military capacity.
And then you have to understand the new
world in which we live and really pick a
team and say which alliances are we
going to nurture. In my opinion the best
thing Britain could do is to nurture the
alliance with the United States to make
itself relevant within that alliance for
in the ways that I've already talked
about and then join forces with the US
and recognize that we have very similar
interests in a lot of things and if we
were prepared to act like it then we'd
be in a much better place.
And also you got to have more kids.
A lot more kids.
>> Why?
>> Uh if you if you look at forget about
the moral kind of sensibilities and
politically correct stuff about it, the
more people you have, the more powerful
you are comparative all other things
being equal, right? A country with more
people is more powerful than a country
with fewer people. Just if everything
else is the same. But more importantly,
our dem we're in a demographic death
spiral. And this is one of the reasons
we have had mass immigration.
Politicians won't tell you the honest
truth of it. But the real reason is they
keep bringing in hundreds of thousands
of people is if they don't, we will see
the reality which is that we're getting
poorer all the time. But if they bring
in a mass of people from outside, they
can say that the economy is growing not
because it's growing on a per capita
basis, but because you've simply added
more people to the population. And if if
if this is seems abstract, think about
it like this. Let's say you have
uh you have a family, you, your
girlfriend, and you've got two kids,
right? And your total household income
is £100,000 a year, let's say, for the
four of you. Now, let's say you bring in
your in-laws. They live in the same
house, right? They don't earn anything.
Let's say they own 10 grand a year each.
So now your household income is
£120,000. So you've got richer, haven't
you?
>> No, you've now got six people to spread
that money over and now you're per
person a lot poorer. That's what British
and European leaders have done so that
they could pretend that we're not
getting poorer all the time. That's why
they've done it. Uh this is what they
say. We need people to come and do the
jobs. That that's what they mean. They
mean we need to bring in more people so
we can tell you the economy has grown by
0.3%.
While you've been getting poorer. So
you've got to address the economic side
of this as well of the demographic
thing. And the third thing actually is
societies with lots of kids kids are
just much more dynamic than societies
without them. You know, you get very
stale when you've got too many older
people. You need that young energy, that
young blood. You need young people. You
need children around. Uh and then they
will of course be the next generation to
drive things forward. So you we've got
to have loads more loads more kids.
>> New year always has a strange energy to
it because people start talking about
their goals, fresh starts, and new
habits. But the reality is that most
people carry the same ideas they had
last year into the new year. I'm guilty
of that, too. And they still don't end
up doing anything with them. And I get
why. Starting something new, especially
if it's a business or a project, is
overwhelming. Before you start, you're
looking for the perfect moment and to be
the perfect version of yourself. When
really what matters most is taking that
first step. If you've had an idea for a
while, a product, a store, something
you've been sitting on, our sponsor
Shopify makes it easy to get started
because you can build your store, sell
on socials, take payments, use AI tools,
and manage everything all in one place.
So, if 2026 is the year you finally back
yourself, go to shopify.co.uk/bartlet
and start selling. And you can sign up
for a $1 per month trial right now, too.
Just go to shopify.co.uk/ UK/bartlet.
I promise you, you don't need to have it
all figured out. You just need to start.
You know, every once in a while, you
come across a product that has such a
huge impact on your life that you'd
probably describe as a gamecher. And I
would say for about 35 to 40% of my
team, they would currently describe this
product that I have in front of me
called Ketone IQ, which you can get at
ketone.com,
as a game changer. But the reason I
became a co-owner of this company and
the reason why they they now are a
sponsor of this podcast is because one
day when I came to work, there was a box
of this stuff sat on my desk. I had no
idea what it was. Lily and my team says
that this company have been in touch. So
I went upstairs, tried it, and quite
frankly, the rest is history. in terms
of my focus, my energy levels, how I
feel, how I work, how productive I am.
Game changer. So, if you want to give it
a try, visit ketone.com/stephven
for 30% off. You'll also get a free gift
with your second shipment. And now you
can find Ketone IQ at Target stores
across the United States where your
first shot is completely free of charge.
And what do you think of Kier Starmmer
and the way he's leading the UK?
>> It's very tempting always. We come back
to the Biden Trump left right thing to
put the blame on one specific person. I
don't think he's doing a good job for
the reasons that I told you. We we've
got the highest tax burden in peace time
history. So, he's driving business
through the floor. I know that you will
we you and I have never spoken about
this, but I bet you could name 50 people
off the top of your head who've left the
UK to go to other places, who run
businesses. You're nodding, right, for
people listening. But why is that
happening? because the business climate
here is not good.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> The taxes here are very high and also
the quality of life here is declined.
>> And generally, you know, I think maybe
the first point you said about climate,
there's a pessimism.
>> Yes.
>> Why is that? Why is that?
>> It's self-fulfilling.
>> Yes.
>> It's like a self-fulfilling pessimism
where founders who are in my portfolio
that I've invested in will come to me
and say, "Hi, you know, we've just sold
uh 10% of the business for 20 million."
Yeah.
>> And then the next sentence will be their
escape plan.
>> Mhm.
>> And that didn't used to happen even 10
years ago.
>> And that's because of government policy.
That's the only way that this happens.
Right? Because if the government a keeps
taxing you up to your eyeballs and b
keeps telling you that you are evil,
which is what it does, right? If you're
rich in Britain, you are evil. That's
the that's the algorithm we have. And we
treat successful people. We immediately
assume that they're privileged people.
Well, my pet theory is that this goes
back to the land of gentry. The idea
that in this country if you were rich,
there was a time when that was almost
certainly because your dad was rich or
at least people thought that. And so
this sense that if someone is successful
economically, financially, it's probably
because they've benefited from some sort
of illotten privilege. It permeates
everything. In America, people don't
feel that way. They go, "You've been
successful because you've worked really
hard and you've had a great idea. I'd
love to learn from you. I'd love to be
more like you." In Britain, we go,
"You've been successful. You know, we
got to tax you." So, if the government
keeps taxing you and then telling you
you're a bad person while you pay the
overwhelming share of the taxes in the
country, it's not a great place to be.
You know, if I come home tonight and my
wife says, "Yeah, you earn all the
money, but you're a dick and I don't
like you." And
after a while, you sort of go, well, if
this isn't working, I'll go somewhere
where I'm wanted. Do you know what I
mean? And I think that's what's
happening to a lot of the most driven,
the most talented, the most successful,
the most creative people. And so, we're
driving out the business, we're driving
out the entrepreneurs. Then on the
industrial side of it, we talked about
it before, net zero basically means that
any energyintensive business is
completely unviable in Britain. And I'm
sure you've seen this with AI and lots
of other things. you go to where you can
do your business. Then on top of that
you add regulation particularly in in
Europe which restricts your ability to
do things again. So there's this um you
and it didn't didn't have to be like
that. It wasn't like that in the '9s in
this country, right? There was a
positive go-getter business climate and
you can do that again. You just have to
have a leader who is willing to do that.
And SAM is the opposite of that. And
part of the reason is that they simply
can't do anything about the fact that we
are spending huge amounts of money uh
keeping lots and lots of people trapped
in welfare against in many ways against
their interest and actually in some ways
I would argue even against their will
because and I've made this point before
if you said to you're a very driven
person. I'm a very driven person, but
when I was in my early 20s, if you'd
said to me, "You don't need to work."
You know, I know you're feeling a bit
depressed, as I was in my early 20s. I
wasn't sure what I was doing with life.
You're a bit depressed. You're a bit
anxious. I remember going to apply for a
job and just sweating buckets cuz I was
so anxious. Right. Well, you've got
anxiety, you've got depression, you
can't work. We'll give you 20 grand a
year and you can just, you know, we'll
write you off and you just sit home,
play on the PlayStation, smoke weed. I
would have taken that. Most people would
have taken that. And that's the position
we have put a lot of our young people
in. Uh we just ride them off. We give
them benefits and we forget about them.
And that welfare bill has become a
unsustainable, but it's also uncutable.
They try the Labor government tried to
cut it. They tried to reform welfare and
their own backbenches revolted and they
caved and they said, "No, no, no. We're
not going to reform welfare. We're going
to tax the rich because the rich, you
know, don't pay enough tax." when in the
reality I think the top you maybe look
this up 10 the top 10% of taxpayers in
this country pay
I think more than half of all the tax
probably significantly more than half of
all the tax but look it up I think the
top 1% pay 33% of all the tax fact check
me on this
>> okay so the top 10% of taxpayers
pay 60% of all income tax
>> yeah and also um what's the other one
the capital gains as well. If you look
up capital gains, it's basically the
same. So if you put those two together,
which is basically what we pay on
earning, the top 10% pay 60% of it. So
what happens when you chase out those
people, which is what we're doing. What
happens to your tax base? You get less
and less tax. That means you have to tax
the people who haven't left yet more and
more in order to pay people who are not
who are net consumers of tax revenues.
According to HM revenue and customs data
in the UK, the top 1% pay 30% of all
income.
>> I said 33. So 30. Yeah.
>> Yeah. So what happens when you say that
1% are evil and they must pay more? 1%
pay 30% of all the tax.
>> It's funny. I'm quite a torn person on
this subject because I I represent kind
of two sides of this argument. The first
side of the argument, I just have this
sort of visceral memory of being sat at
my desk in Mosside with these like baiff
letters on my right, this smashed up
laptop on my left, knowing that I had no
way of eating that day and thinking,
"Oh, I you know what I need to do?
There's this thing called jobsekers
allowance."
>> And I was like messing with the do I
join it cuz like right now I'm like
scavenging for pound coins to see if I
can buy some Chinese from Young Dar
Takeaway. And I printed off the forms
and the forms were there in front of me
on the desk to apply for jobsekers
allowance when I was maybe 18 years old,
roughly that age, 18, 19 years old. And
because I got so close, I have the huge
amount of empathy for people that
>> get to that point. And then on the other
side, because I'm now in a different
world
>> and I I'm around entrepreneurs so much
who are
>> so so frequently telling me their escape
plan from the UK that I feel the need to
let the average the the normal person
that's listening to this podcast that
maybe doesn't have the access to
entrepreneurs or the inside
conversations that that I have with
entrepreneurs know that when people come
on the show and tell you that rich
people will leave, it is my experience
that rich people leave and like because
there there is an argument ongoing
argument no they won't leave and there
people point out different things no
they they leave they leave I mean we
just saw Revolute which is one of the
the most successful companies emerge
from the UK in recent times it's
probably going to be worth a hundred
billion the founder left
>> I think it's Dubai or somewhere it's
gone to
>> and people say well Britain can't
compete with a zero tax environment we
don't need to compete with a zero tax
environment people want to live in
Britain still you just have to stop
clobbering over them over the head and
calling them evil.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, look, you know, I can give you a
sob story as well. Like when I was at
university, I had no I had to stop
university cuz I couldn't pay for it. I
slept on the street in a park. Blah blah
blah blah blah. Empathy for days for
people who are in that position. And
there are lots of people, by the way,
and this is important to say, Stephen,
who are not in your position. They're
not super talented. They're not
predisposed to success. They're not as
hardworking and motivated as you for
whatever reason. And many people are
disabled. Many people have all sorts of
other issues. And of course, we've got
to help them. But what we have done is
trapped now hundreds of thousands, if
not millions of people who could be
working and have meaning and purpose in
their life on welfare and we're not
helping them get off it because it's
much easier to give them a payout and
forget about them. That's what's
happening. And so, you know, I've had
these views since before I was in any
way successful. I just looked at what
works. And when we talk about rich
people leaving, the thing is I don't
care about rich people leaving. People
who have a lot of money leaving is not
really an issue for me. What's an issue
for me is people who are going to create
wealth leaving. So on that point, the
founder of Revolute leaving the UK, Nick
Strinsky, I think his name is, um,
estimates say, credible reports say that
because he's leaving, there's going to
be a3 billion pound potential loss of
capital gains tax that he would have
paid had he not absconded to the UAE.
Now to put this into more stark terms
what that means. I then um did some
research and I was looking at how many
people it would take to pay that 3
billion. How many average taxpayers it
would take to pay that 3 billion that we
that we lose by him leaving.
>> And it says roughly £450,000
average UK taxpayers because the average
UK taxpayer pays about £7,000 to £7,500
a year. So very simple math 3 billion
divided by 7,000 equals 430,000 people.
Mhm.
>> So in plain English, that billionaire's
potential tax bill is equal to the
entire income tax of a midsized UK city
for one year because that person decided
to leave.
>> Congratulations, you tax the rich.
Congratulations. Now half a million
people have to pay more tax.
Well done.
That's what we're doing. And because
it's become a moral argument because the
rich are evil
in our mentality,
people don't hear this point at all. It
just totally goes over their head. They
go, you know, but but the rich are evil,
they must pay more tax. And you go, even
if I agreed with you, it still doesn't
work in practice.
So if something is not working in
practice, why would you keep doing it?
I think as well, you know, one of your
other points was around what the UK has
to offer them. And I think if the UK was
really growth focused and you know, the
energy point you made, energy was
cheaper here, then
>> that equation that these founders are
making whether to stay or to leave would
tilt a little bit further in our
direction. So, it's super it's so
difficult.
>> And no, no disrespect to Dubai, but most
people don't want to have to live in
Dubai.
I think the UK is a lovely honestly I
mean
>> that's what I mean right and I say this
with there's lots of great appealing
things about Dubai but if you dealt with
prime in the UK and you had a growth
focused mindset you had a tax climate
that encouraged people to start
businesses and employ people we wouldn't
be losing these people and we shouldn't
be losing these people they are they are
the people who will create the wealth of
the future and they should be doing it
here they should be founding and keeping
their businesses here and if you did
that then you start to turn the whole
thing we've been talking about around
because ultimately everything is about
economics in in this sense the military
is about economics.
It's about do you have the resources to
have a strong military? We don't. So we
don't.
>> So which leader do we need?
>> Again, I don't like getting into the
personality side of things. But what you
need is someone who understands how the
economy works.
>> Why don't you like getting into the
personality side of things?
>> Because what happens when if I give you
a name?
>> Yeah.
>> Then immediately people say, "Oh, he's
one of them."
>> Okay.
>> Right. I am not one of them of any them.
I'm just telling you what the policies
are that I think would work for our
country. If Kia Starama tomorrow came on
your show and said, "Stephen, I'm here
to announce a great British
transformation. We're going to cut
business taxes. We're going to get rid
of net zero. We're going to make sure
that we have the cheapest energy in the
world for our businesses to grow and
thrive. We're going to have a strong,
capable military. And by the way, I've
just hired 50,000 new police officers to
deal with all the ridiculous amounts of
street crime we've got in London. Sign
me up. I'm all K star ride or die,
right? But that's probably not going to
happen. That's probably not going to
happen with any of the other leaders
that we have. So, I'm here telling you
what I think the right policies are. And
if there's a leader who advocates for
those policies, that's the sort of
leader that I will support.
>> Only 18% of Britons view Karma
positively.
>> Yeah.
>> With around 65 to 72% holding an
unfavorable opinion.
>> You're desperate for me to slag off
Karma. I'm happy to do it.
>> No, no. I'm I'm actually not. [laughter]
I'm actually not. Do you know what? Do
you know what my opinion? Kiss Dharma?
Probably a really nice person.
>> Probably
>> probably a really nice person.
>> Yeah. I don't really care how nice he
is. And that's my attitude to all
politicians. I care about whether
they're going to do things that are good
for our country. Uh from what I know,
he's probably he strikes me as a very uh
well-intentioned, probably fairly
competent person.
>> Uh but what he's doing is completely
wrong. The only reason I don't like to
go in on him is I think he I I think
he's useless. I do. I also don't think
it's fair to lay the blame for
everything that's happening at his feet.
The Conservatives were useless before
that. The Lib Dems and the Conservatives
were useless before that. The Labour
Party under Blair were actually not
useless. They were really really good at
ter doing terrible things to the
country. They were very competent at
doing that. So what we have had for now
one, two, three decades is terrible
leadership that's taken us in completely
the wrong direction.
>> I I'm I'm I have to cite the statistics
around his favorability or popularity
because it puts everything you're saying
in context, which is these ideas aren't
popular.
>> No. Polling has shown that Stalmer's
approval among the British public is the
weakest of any recent UK prime minister
with dissatisfaction levels on some
trackers showing him to be below most
predecessors um in even in the Labor
government. So that's the the weird part
because it's not it's doesn't seem to be
working to drive favorability either.
>> No, but but this is why I'm saying
focusing on him individually isn't
helpful actually. And this is not to
argue with you unnecessarily. If you put
Chem Bono in his place, she'd have the
same favorability ratings.
>> Really? Even though she has different
ideas.
>> Does she?
>> I don't know. You tell me.
>> She has some different ideas. I mean,
the Conservative Party's gone a long way
to changing their policy on things like
net zero, right? But while they were in
power, they were doing all the same
stuff. They were arresting people for
tweets. They were driving the economy
into the ground with this green lunacy.
They were the ones that oversaw the
decline of our military. So uh in in in
some ways the personality conversation
is really not that important here.
What's important is a gigantic paradigm
shift needs to happen to our attitude to
everything. And one of them is dealing
with unaffordable welfare. The tries
didn't do that. Labor aren't doing it. I
actually thought Labor had a better shot
because at least people wouldn't say
labor are evil and they hate poor
people. That's what they say when the
Tories tried to cut welfare. When Labor
tried to cut welfare, I didn't think
that would happen, but they just caved
to their own backbench. Maybe they had
to for political reasons. But you you
you just have to the the shift that
needs to happen in Britain is not
political. It's cultural. We have to
change the mindset that we have as a
country around these things.
>> Cultural transitions are very very very
hard. And I say that from the
perspective as a business owner. If you
tried to get me to change when I had a
lot of people, so say you I remember in
my German office back in the day in
social change German office, we had 150
people. Very very different culture to
the UK. I thought naively as a 23 24
year old I could fly there
>> and change the culture of the Berlin
office.
[laughter]
>> How dumb was I?
>> This is not how we do things.
>> I could not change I could not change
the culture of the German the Berlin
office. So I think about a country
changing the culture of a country.
>> Yeah. That's why I'm what I call an
accelerationist.
>> What does that mean? It means that I
believe that the only thing the only way
that these things will truly
fundamentally get better is when they
get really really bad first.
>> So you think it's going to get really
really
>> the only way to change the culture is
for people to understand what's actually
happening uh so that they can't pretend
the things that are happening are not
happening. And that's what's happening
at the moment. Most people don't yet
quite know that they're poorer today
than they were 20 years ago. Most people
still think that we are saving the
planet when we reduce Britain's carbon
emissions from 2% to 1.9% of global
carbon emissions. While in fact, we're
not even doing that. We're taking our
carbon emissions and we're sending them
to India and China and then shipping
back the stuff they make for us in a
dirtier way on big tankers which
actually consume more dirty fuel and
we're actually ending up increasing our
CO2 output, not reducing it. Most people
don't know that. But when they feel it
in their pocket, when they feel like the
we're having a fiscal crisis, when they
feel like they really can't afford their
life anymore, that's when they're going
to start to ask some of these questions.
It's one of the reasons actually the
narrative on net zero is shifting. Like
almost nobody other than the government
in this country still believes in the
idea of net zero, right? Because it's
moving quite quickly in that direction.
Uh and on lots of other things, it will
happen when things get much more
difficult for ordinary people. Sadly, I
don't want that to happen, but I think
it's the only way things get better.
>> But on the subject of global warming,
it's scientific fact that the climate is
changing.
>> Changing unfavorably.
>> Uh what do you mean by unfavorably?
>> Well, if the you know, scientists talk
about the poles melting and how that
will have big impact on you know third
world nations and
>> um how that will be a net negative for
the planet because then you'll see more
migration, you'll see more sort of
natural disasters and those kinds of
things. Well, let's let's not argue
about that because neither of us is a
climate scientist, but let's accept that
for the sake of argument.
>> How is outsourcing our carbon emissions
to other countries
>> while destroying our economy?
>> That's I mean
>> making that better.
>> It's not.
>> It's not right.
>> And that's all I'm saying. All I'm
saying is we are pretending to be saving
the planet when we are not saving the
planet while also destroying our economy
while also making sure that pensioners
in this country die every winter cuz
they can't afford to pay the heating
bills that they need to pay to stay warm
in in what is a first world country.
That's what's happening and it's
happening because of government policy.
So we are not saving the planet by
killing pensioners. I I'm not in favor
of killing pensioners.
>> Have you ever thought about going into
politics? Are you eligible for
>> eligible? Yes. Have I ever thought about
it? No. I I people offer me to go into
politics regularly, but it it's just
it's not my game.
>> Why? You know, you when you talked about
your mission, Yeah. it seems very
aligned with
>> going into politics.
>> I feel I have way more influence doing
what I do now
>> than being, I don't know, prime
minister. Well, that's extremely
unlikely than being the the MP for the
whatever on C who who gets one chance to
ask a question of prime minister. No,
no, no, no, no. I get to speak to way
more people and to persuade more people
and to articulate ideas in a much more
unfiltered sense. And I think that's
really important in the modern climate.
What happens when you become a
politician is you start having to talk
the party line and then you suddenly
don't quite follow what you actually
believe. Now you have to adjust and you
have to say, well, you know, the party
believes this. Well, I'm not interested
in speaking for the party. I'm
interested for describing things in
reality as I see them. And then if there
are politicians who want to take that
on, that's their job, not mine. I just
don't have the temperament for it
either. I just I'm much more interested
about in the truth than I am in getting
along with people, coalition building,
caring about potholes, you know, all of
this other stuff. In this multipolar
world, this is how we got to the
subject. I asked you who would benefit
and is it a good thing? Yeah. And then I
asked you is is it a good thing for
Europe? And you said no. Yeah.
>> Who is it a good thing for?
>> China
>> because they get to do
>> do what they want, whatever that is.
They're much less restrained by the US.
It's good for India for same reasons. Uh
is it good for Russia? We'll find out.
>> Possibly.
>> Good for America.
>> Yes and no. Oh, I think it's that that
is more complicated. I think America
will be able to get what it wants in
that world, but it's probably going to
find itself in a lot more confrontations
internationally, and that will obviously
be a drain on its resources and and its
energy.
>> If you've ever worked in a startup, you
already know it's chaos. It's speed, and
it is survival. And now with AI
accelerating everything, that speed has
only increased. Startups are landing
enterprise deals even earlier than
before. But what comes with those deals
is regulatory requirements. something a
lot of earlystage businesses aren't
equipped to handle. And a sock too, if
you know what that means, isn't always
enough. When having the right kind of
security is the difference between
making a deal or breaking a deal, you
need to have a plan in place. Vanta, who
are a sponsor of this podcast, have an
AI and automation system that makes it
easier to meet buyer expectations in
just days. And they continuously monitor
your compliance so any future deals are
never blocked. With AI changing
regulations, their team knows exactly
what's needed and when it's needed, and
they've built the fastest and easiest
path to get you there. If you're running
a startup and this appeals, you can
visit vanta.com/diary
and get $1,000 off. That's
vanta.com/dary
for $1,000 off. And the bigger win, your
peace of mind.
Make sure you keep what I'm about to say
to yourself. I'm inviting 10,000 of you
to come even deeper into the diary of a
CEO. Welcome to my inner circle. This is
a brand new private community that I'm
launching to the world. We have so many
incredible things that happen that you
are never shown. We have the briefs that
are on my iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behind the scenes
conversations with the guest and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released and so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview, and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private closed
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to
daccircle.com.
I will speak to you there.
>> Have we ever been in a multipolar world
through history?
>> Well, yeah, loads of times.
>> What happened next? Look, a friend of
mine, very good friend of mine gave me
uh the the history of the English-sp
speakaking peoples by Winston Churchill
and it talks about the history of this
country of England in particular and
basically you go from strong ruler and
then he has no no heir. You have a
period of weakness and what happens
there's a big power struggle over the
throne over over power. This is this is
what's going to happen. you are going to
see more instability, more violence,
more attempts to fight for dominance in
the world. It's going to be a much more
unstable period of time. Unfortunately,
it's one of the reasons I've been so
passionate about trying to say let's not
let's not allow this to happen.
>> Instability.
>> Yeah. in terms of war, in terms of
>> in terms of war, in terms of conflict,
in terms of people to trying to redraw
maps, in terms of people trying to get
access to resources that otherwise would
have been considered unchallengeable,
etc. Yeah,
>> I was looking back through history and I
was asking the question, has there been
a multipolar world before? And there's
these moments through history, fifth
century BC with ancient Greece, um 19th
centur 19th century Europe between the
1850s and 1914s, the wearing states of
China in 475 BC. And then my next
question was what happens next?
>> And the short answer is more friction,
less restraint, higher risk.
Realistically, the first thing that
happens is rules weaken, which I guess
is kind of what we're seeing at the
moment
>> with this whole idea of international
law.
>> Regional wars begin, not one big war.
Arms races accelerate. Some alliances
harden, economic fragmentation, domestic
pressure rises, so higher defense
spending, higher taxes, etc., um, lower
growth.
And the three end games history keeps
showing that we have managed chaos,
major war, a reset, and then a new hedge
hegeimon emerges.
>> Yes.
>> What the does that mean?
>> Hegeimon is the one dominant power that
that that sort of in the same way that
the US had that moment between 91 and
recently when it was the only undisputed
power in the world.
>> Do you agree with that pattern of
events? Well, I was going to say you
sort of make it look like I've got all
my ideas from AI, but yeah. Yeah. But
but but the see this is the thing is
like before we started I said to you,
Stephen, do me one favor. Don't present
me as an expert cuz I'm just a guy
thinking from first principles and
explaining the basics as I understand
them. All of this is common sense
because ultimately it comes back to
human nature, right? We are a tribal
competitive species. That's what we are.
So when there isn't a dominant force
that everyone respects and accepts as
the leader, what happens every single
time when you have a power vacuum, you
have a power struggle. That's what we
are seeing and that's what you're going
to see. It's human nature. It's not
about knowing geopolitics and having
studied international theory for 40
years. It's just basic human nature.
When there when there is a dispute about
who the leader is, that always creates
the thing that AI just told you.
>> Well, the next step in that is a power
struggle.
>> Yeah. But that's what you're seeing now.
>> But in there's never been a nuclear,
>> right? And nuclear weapons have been the
great force for peace. We had the the
great historian from the rest is
history, Dominic Samrach, on the show
and I asked him about this and he said,
"Yeah, I mean nuclear weapons is why we
haven't had a major war and it's maybe
the one thing that will constrain our
ability to have a major war." It's one
possibility.
It's also the great risk.
>> Maybe this is where the cycle ends
because of nuclear weapons is what
you're saying. Maybe this is
>> um yeah, I'm I'm I am hopeful on that
front actually. I I am hopeful that
human beings ultimately the instinct for
self-preservation is so strong that we
do not go there. I think that's that's
by far and away the most likely
scenario. But of course, it is something
that humans have to reckon with and we
have to be very very careful as things
more and by the way nuclear weapons
may not be the most powerful weapons
that exist in the world 20 years from
now.
in such a world and I know you don't
like it being about individuals but
Trump is a certain type of leader
>> you know quite unapologetic in what he
says
>> I think he's got even more unapologetic
because he only has a couple of years
left and he can't be reelected because
of the laws are you concerned that if a
different type of leader
arrived into power in the US maybe
someone who China and Russia thought was
less likely to
send the the the jets in at nighttime
and bomb nuclear bunkers or snatch a
president from their house.
>> Would that be a risk for the West in
your view?
>> Massive.
>> So do you think
>> but that's how we got here. This is why
that withdrawal from Afghanistan
embarrassing as it was is exactly how
you get everything else. It's just one
symptom of people thinking we talked
about October 7th, we talked about the
invasion of Ukraine, right? That's what
happens when they see weakness. This is
what happens. I remember, you know, um
it's kind of funny. It shows the
cultural differences between the Russian
mindset and the Western mindset because
the Jungle Book that we had in the
Soviet Union is very different to the
one that you see that you guys had here.
Did you see Jungle, you know, the
original Jungle Book?
>> The Disney one?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's
all have the, you know, uh
>> context you should probably say where
you come from because
>> I'm from from the Soviet Union. I was
born there. Um and
>> your your father, you've got mother and
father that Ukrainian and Russian.
>> Yeah. Basically. Yeah. Um, so the Soviet
Jungle Book adaptation, very different.
And there's this the one of the opening
scenes is Akella, who is the lead wolf.
He's the the wolf, the leader of the
wolf pack. They're on a hunt and he
they're hunting and he misses the he's
supposed to grab the animal and he
misses. And suddenly the cry goes around
the jungle. I ke
knows what that means.
Everybody knows when the leader shows
weakness and fails, that's the moment
when everything goes to and there's
a power struggle for his role because
he's no longer top dog.
It's really as simple as that.
>> So, do you think Trump's a good thing
for the West?
>> Trump is a good thing for America.
>> I think what he's done by virtue of his
behavior is he's exposed the weakness of
Europe. And there is a cleave now
happening between Europe and America.
And to that extent, I think it could be
a good thing for Europe if Europe gets
its act together and says, "Actually,
we've got to wake up from the nightmare
that we've created for ourselves and
start acting differently." If that
happens, it will also be a good thing
for the West. That is not what's
happening right now. It's going in the
exact opposite direction.
>> What would it take for you to leave the
UK?
Um
you well look I like you know everybody
gets job opportunities and stuff goes
for a year or two somewhere that that
that could happen in any circumstance.
If you mean like for me to say I'm
leaving Britain never coming back. Um I
think it would have to be clear at the
next election that Britain is actually
going further down the path that we're
on. So two or three years from now, I'd
have to conclude that there's actually
no there's no way we're coming back.
It's over. And that's happened to great
countries and great civilizations in
history. If that's what happens, then I
I don't see why I should do my children
to living here. If we can rescue it, uh,
and
make this sounding like Trump, make
Britain great again, but you know what I
mean. Um, then I I I would love to fight
for that and I'd love to to have my
children be part of that.
What is the most important thing that we
didn't talk about that we should have
talked about?
>> This point I keep coming back to,
Stephen, which is we can't live in a
world in which we care more about how
things make us feel than about the
consequences of the actions that we take
so much. This is a Thomas Sol. Last time
you had me on, I mentioned to you what a
great writer and thinker Thomas Soul is.
I don't know if you've had a chance to
check out any of his work, but I
recommend it thoroughly to everyone
watching and listening. He he talks
about the fact that the last several
decades have been spent replacing what
works with what feels good. That's the
one thing we're not talking about. All
the policies you and I have been talking
about are all about what makes us feel
good as opposed to what actually works
in practice. And our conversation about
chasing out entrepreneurs, it's exactly
about that. It's exactly what it's
about. It's about fulfilling your
ideological emotional needs as opposed
to doing things that practically work.
If we can make that adjustment and get
back to reality, the world's our oyster.
>> An immigrants love letter to the West,
the book that you wrote. It was a smash
here, Sunday Times bestseller.
>> Yeah. Unfortunately, it gets more
accurate every day, which is really
worrying because I was very pessimistic
about a lot of the things I said.
>> That is absolutely right. You wrote
this, was it 2022?
>> 2022, it came out.
>> 2022.
>> Yeah.
>> And it appears to be a prediction as the
days go on. A prediction that is being
validated, unfortunately. I highly
recommend everybody reads this book. I'm
going to link it below for anyone that
hasn't read it. What's unique about you
is you do appear to be very wedded to
objective truth as you see it versus
being ideologically cap captured by
either side. And I've seen you I've seen
you both attack the right at times and
I've also seen you attack the left at
times which is it's a unique position to
be in in a world with algorithms that
try and push you into a particular echo
chamber.
I guess on that point what is it about
the the right that you take most issue
with at the moment?
>> Oh there's a thing that I've uh other
people have at a similar time. So, I'm
not claiming authorship of it, but
there's something that I call the woke
right, uh, which is essentially an
identitarian resentment victimhood-based
movement on the right, represented by
the sort of extreme characters like Nick
Fuentes and Candace Owens in the United
States. You know, their worldview is
that they they've been oppressed. You
know, the work narrative was we are
oppressed. Well, now they say we we've
been oppressed and uh it's all the fault
of various groups, the Jews, the
whoevers. So, it's a kind of um there's
almost, you know, I think it's fair to
say that there are elements of it that
are just openly fascistic and and and
reminiscent of the Nazis that we saw in
the 1930s ideologically speaking. Um,
and the mainstream right has utterly
rejected these people, which I think is
really reassuring. But there are some
people who who say well actually no no
we need to include them and we shouldn't
divide the conservative movement which I
think is a huge mistake from for
conservatives to make because their
movement and their reputation with
normal people will be very very badly
polluted in the eyes of independents and
moderate people who actually represent
the overwhelming majority of the public.
Even in America, which is so divided and
so partisan, the normal average person
will vote for this party or for that
party depending on what they see. And in
Britain, that's even more the case. And
so to the extent that the right, so
they're basically there's a risk of the
right repeating the mistakes of the
left. What happened on the left? Woke
people came along and they said, "We're
the left. Our crazy work ideas is
actually the left." and the sensible
people on the left were terrified of
challenging them. And so over time, most
people began to associate the left with
blue-haired, nose piercing, you know,
Greta Tunberg kind of ideology. And they
went, I don't want any of that. Well, on
the right, if the right allows its
extremist fringe to do the same thing,
then lots of people are going to
distance themselves from that. So, I
think the right has a tremendous
opportunity to, you know, we've had this
great tension. And I know you've had
Jordan Peterson on your show and I'm
sure he talked about chaos and order and
that relationship is a very fragile
thing in society. We have had so much
chaos that there is a lot of craving for
order now. There's a craving to deal
with crime. There's a craving to deal
with illegal immigration. There's a
craving to deal with cultural uh
disruption that we've had, right?
There's a craving for that sense of
order to come back. And if the right is
reasonable and sensible about addressing
those issues, they could be in charge
for a very long time and have an
opportunity to put some of their views
into public policy, which is they
haven't had uh the opportunity to do for
a long time. If they allow the
extremists to take over, they will be
painted, the entire movement will be
painted as the extremists and then they
will not have the opportunity to
actually implement their agenda.
>> Are you happy?
>> Very.
>> What makes you happy?
>> My family.
What about your family makes you happy?
>> Having children is a blessing. It's the
best thing ever. I you know I banged on
about this to you last time, but it is
>> why
>> why are children the best thing ever?
>> Yeah.
>> Can't explain it. It's not one of the
like I can find some words to give you,
but it's just one of those things. It's
like you you don't know it until you
have that experience. Uh I could give
you some nice sound bites. You know, one
of the things I've said in the past is
that the future is no longer an
abstraction.
>> What does that mean?
>> It means that
in the past I cared about this country
or this civilization from a fairly
theoretical perspective.
Now the future of this country is one
person and maybe other people coming
along, right? Little people that I have.
They are the future in my mind, right?
So I'm much more attached. I'm much more
attached to the people who came before
me. I have much more understanding of my
when you have kids, you have a much
better understanding of your parents cuz
you go, "Oh, wow." So, the reason they
did this stupid thing is a I'm also
doing it now for some reason. And also,
they were really dealing with all of all
the things that I'm now deal I've got a
job and I've got a relationship and I've
got a this and I've got a that. So, of
course, they sometimes behaved in ways
that I didn't understand or like or
whatever. So, you have more empathy for
your parents. You also have much much
more concern about where your country is
going, your nation's going, your
community is going, your immediate
environment cuz that's where your
children live. And then there just joy.
I mean, it's um there's nothing like it.
There's really really nothing like it.
It's the most wonderful thing. It's
hard.
>> It you don't sleep a lot and it's
stressful at times, but it's the best.
It's absolutely the best.
>> And you've got two kids.
>> I've got one. Uh but maybe more on the
way.
>> Oh, okay. Congratulations. Thank you.
>> And what what is your primary concern
for the world they're coming into?
>> Well, we've talked about all of this,
right? I
>> there was a primary
>> I think my primary concern for my kids
is that my wife and I do the best job we
can in raising them well. And then
ultimately they're going to be their own
people and they're going to have to deal
with the world in front of them in
exactly the same way that others before
have done. My grandfather uh my
great-grandfather
he was younger than me now when he was
sent to the Eastern Front while he had a
baby son at home and he never came back.
Human beings have had to deal with all
of this throughout history. We always
have to deal with the reality of the
terrible world that we face at that
moment in time. They're going to have to
do the same. I can't protect them from
that. What I can do is set them up in
the best possible way. And that's the
only thing I can do as a parent. That's
what I'm trying to do. We have a closing
tradition where Damascus leaves a
question for the next.
>> Yeah.
>> The question that's been left for you is
who was the biggest non-family member
influence in your life and how did they
make you a better person?
>> Yeah. Not fair to boil it down to one. I
think um I I had a teacher once who um
basically made me realize that it's very
very important to give people an
opportunity to prove themselves and he
did that by giving me an opportunity
when I really didn't deserve it but he
gave it to me and I took it. I've also
just intellectually Thomas Saul I I I
mentioned him reading his books is just
completely transformational for me and
it really helped me think about the
world. I think on a on a on a kind of
personal behavioral level I got a a huge
opportunity uh to to tour with Jordan
Peterson for three weeks a couple of
years back. Uh, and that was completely
transformational seeing him up close,
spending time with him, seeing that this
is a man who the way he is in public is
exactly the way that he is in in
private. And so he really one of those
very very rare people who preaches what
he practices. I remember we uh I think
it was El Paso. We arrived right on the
south on the on the on the border and we
arrived we were late from the airport
starving starving. And one of the things
that tends to happen is everyone who
goes to his live shows works out that he
might be at the best steak restaurant in
town
>> on the day. So we turn up to the steak
restaurant cuz he only eats steak. We're
starving. We sit down. Um the the waiter
brings the menus. We're the moment we
start looking at the menus. This group
of guys comes over guy guys and girls
comes over. He stands up, forgets about
the menu. We're starving. gives them,
you know, all the attention in the
world. Selfies, has a little chat, ask
them what they do, blah blah blah blah
blah, sits down, places the order.
Another group of people come over, gives
them the same amount of attention. And
by this point, we're dying of hunger.
Finally, our steaks arrive, and you know
they do in America, they say, "Please
check that it's been cooked properly."
So, he cuts in, he cuts off a piece, he
puts it on a fork, and as he's about to
place it in his mouth, a group of
literally 20 people shows up saying,
"Dr. Peterson, I'm so sorry. He puts the
fork down, stands up, and gives them all
the exact same amount of attention that
he'd given the previous people. And just
in everyone that he interacted with,
that's what I saw. A guy who talks about
living in a certain way, actually
practices it. And that was, you know,
incredibly inspiring for me. Really
educational, gave me a lot of thoughts
about my relationships, how I live my
life. Um, he's he's a great man.
>> Constantine. Thank you.
>> Thank you very much. Thanks for having
me.
>> Staying in the pursuit of truth and I
highly recommend people check out
trigonometry your podcast. I'm going to
link it below. Um and also the book is
going to be linked below. Is there
anything else?
>> Yes, Stephen. When are you coming on
trigonometry? That's the question.
>> I've just finished my book.
>> Oh,
>> it comes out in
>> UK exclusive is what I'm hearing.
>> Deal. Deal. [laughter]
>> Signed.
>> Thank you so much. I really appreciate
it.
>> Thanks, man. I appreciate you having me.
I believe that we are already at the
early stages if not in World War II.
>> We are one [music] misunderstanding, one
miscalculation away,
>> or even one AI generated viral video
>> from nuclear annihilation. So, here's a
terrifying detail that the public does
not know. So,
>> wow.